[Music] good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this
video I'm going to introduce the idea of a group
into this relatively simple geometrical context
looking at the projective line so this is an
example of an algebraic structure somewhat an
abstract one which has a lot of applications in
many different parts of mathematics and this is
a relatively simple but non-trivial interesting
example of a a group that we can get our hands on
so the context is we're working in this projective
line with a ukian structure so it's not just the
projective line it's really the ukian projective
line so we're talking about lines through the
origin in a two-dimensional space determined
by proportions like 3: 1 or 1: 2 or - 1: 1 we're
talking about this projective quadrant which is
how we measure the separation between any two of
such lines okay there's two projective one points
this is the formula for the projective quadrants
between them and I've uh listed a few of them here
should Circle this one as well okay so for example
the projector coordinat between these two is a
half we've seen that before between this line here
which is the line 1 Zer the axis Line and 31 is
1/10th just plug things in between here and here
is 1/5th between say here and here is 9/10 between
here and here is four fths you can check um some
of those so it's a very uh nice replacement or
um alternative to thinking about angles I know
we're all indoctrinated pretty well to uh to
think in terms of angles immediately whenever we
see lines you know how far apart of the lines we
think about some angle but angles are really
problematic as I pointed out several times in
this series already and I hope you're starting to
appreciate that working with angles necessitates
know dealing with these infinite processes which
in fact don't actually end even to Define an angle
requires infinite process you have to somehow
calculate a length of an arc of a circle which
is an infinite process all Archimedes and then to
define the cosiness and signs and various circular
functions and their inverses they're all infinite
processes which in practice you really basically
can never do and so necessarily working with
angles always has this approximate aspect we're
always just working with approximate values which
is highly unsatisfactory if we want to do geometry
completely correctly so this is a very important
alternative to that whole story and we'll see that
it's vastly Superior both computationally and in
terms of understanding mathematics more broadly
okay it it really opens up uh so many other ways
of thinking about things and and new Arenas so
we also talked about these rotations last time
these things called rows so basically they were
just symbols row sub A to B and we Define this
symbol by the how it interacted with the symbol
for a one point so X to Y times row A to B is by
definition this one point ax - b y to BX + a y
and for example if we want to say rotate uh by
the minus1 to 1 rotation then 1 2 * row - 1 to
1 is 31 and so this can be viewed as something
that takes this line here and gives us this line
here the same rotation acting on 31 would send it
to minus 21 which would be uh over here somewhere
so it would send it to that line there okay so uh
you can check my calculations here there's some
other uh quadrant is you might like to calculate
and you might uh experiment a little bit just
make sure that you understand how these rotations
work and that they really do sort to behave like
you would imagine rotations do they're physically
rotations but there's no angles involved anywhere
in site there's another important foundational
issue around what I'm doing here which I want to
take a little bit of time to discuss with you okay
that's having to do with how we should think or
interpret the symbol row sub A to B so so we've
introduced this symbol and geometrically I've
referred to it in terms of a rotation something
that's familiar to us physically okay but the
question is should we really think of this thing
whatever it is as a transformation or a mapping
or a function typically say from the projective
line to the projective line so in modern 20th
century usage and building up of mathematics
the functional notation for things became
sort of all important most mathematics started
being written and expressed in the language of
functions going from sets to sets so it BEC sort
of automatic for students to invoke this standard
construction where you have a function or maybe a
transformation or a mapping they all mean roughly
the same thing from one set to another set and
we think of this as being something that takes
an element from this set and moves it into an
element in this new set so is that the way that
we should want to think about this symbol the
answer is probably not okay I don't really want
to encourage you to think about things this
way there is a possibility of doing that and
we will do this informally as well but you should
recognize that that's only sort of um a possible
way of thinking it's not really inherent in the
actual nature of the object so we must recognize
that this thing row sub A to B is actually just
a symbol defined essentially by its usage in
this formula so the symbol is only defined in
terms of its involvement in this formula now
this formula let's call it star has many possible
interpretations none of which are essential to the
meaning of this object the meaning of this object
is just encoded in this formula the formula is
the meaning the functional interpretation is just
one possible way of looking at this formula this
a very interesting foundational point so let's
let's have a little bit of a more careful look
at what I'm talking about here so let's look
at a specific example so here is one of the
formulas that we had a look at before involving
the projective 1.1 to2 and also 3 to 1 and this
rotation Associated to the U point - 1 to 1 so
we can check that this is a valid formula so we
might ask what does this formula mean all right
okay so here is one possible interpretation let's
call it interpretation a this formula means that
the rotation row which is row minus1 to 1 acts
on this one point to give this one point it's
telling us that we are starting with this we're
acting on this point with this rotation and
the result of that action is 31 geometrically
that's we're starting with this line we're
performing the rotation and we get that line
there okay now here's another quite
different interpretation of the same
formula somebody else can come along and
say well that's all well and good but I
want want to think about this in a different
way that person might say the formula means
that the 1.12 acts on the rotation to give
3 to one so we have this rotation sitting
here and Along Comes the 1. one to2 and
acts on the rotation changes the rotation
into a one point that's another way of
looking at what this formula is doing
there's another possible interpretation
interpretation C which is to regard this
right hand Point as essentially the the
Mover that we say that What's Happening
Here is that the 1. 3:1 joins the 1.12 and
the rotation Row in other words this point
is combining this one with this one sort
of matching up this one with this one it's
like a priest who is marrying this woman to
this man okay that same priest might marry
a lot of other couples but this is just one
particular occasion this priest is marrying
this woman to this man that's another
way of thinking about what this formula
means well which is right which is the correct
interpretation we don't need to decide this this
is not an essential part of the mathematics all
of these interpretations have some validity have
perhaps have some usefulness in some application
it might be useful to think about this formula
this way in another application in this way in
another application in this way the formula has
an existence which is above any particular
interpretation of it let me remind you that
we are human beings and we have a certain biology
and that biology inclines us to think in certain
ways in particular we like to think dynamically we
like to think in terms of motion because we live
in a world in which motion plays an important
role because our biology is well suited to
understanding and visualizing motion so we have
many words in mathematics that reflect this the
idea of an action of something on something else
the idea of movement the idea of a transformation
we say that something goes to something else or
is sent to for example we like diagrams like this
we have three objects a b and c over here and two
other objects R and S and we say that aha here we
see that a gets sent to s b gets sent to s o gets
sent to R we think of this as some kind of dynamic
process but but mathematics does not really need
to share our orientation okay mathematics is
something that exists in the whole universe
across galaxies you know billions of years
ago billions of years from now mathematics is
there we're just some small little planet some
apik creatures around for a little while okay
mathematics is much bigger than us so it's not
necessary for the mathematics to you know be
built on our particular biological prejudices
and orientations so it is far above and beyond us
mathematics is we are privileged to kind of try
to understand some little corner of it that's
great but we shouldn't try to imagine that the
thing naturally fits into our biological point
of view so the lesson that might be taken here
is that functions are not necessarily so important
functions and the functional approach things has
played a huge role in the setup of 20th century
mathematics but that might be a little bit of a
a red herring or a maybe a tangential Direction
because we have seen right that the definition
of a function is in fact highly problematic
saying precisely what a function is is very
very challenging it's usually a challenge that
people don't actually uh address but it's there
nonetheless okay so it might be that functions are
not so important that mathematics can be viewed in
a more static fashion than what we're usually
using okay the M the mathematics is just there
as represented by the formulas the formulas just
are there and we can interpret them in a dynamic
sense because we like to do that but we shouldn't
think that that's intrinsic to the actual nature
of the formulas all right so it turns out that
the symmetries of our projective line with its
ukian structure is actually more extensive than
just having rotations there are other objects
around which play an equally important role
ultimately and we might call them Reflections
so let's introduce Reflections into the story
even though it kind of complicates things a
little bit so for any projective 1. A to B we're
going to define the reflection Sigma sub A to B
as an abstract symbol satisfying this particular
formula in other words we're going to Define this
symbol Sigma purely in terms of how it interacts
with a projective one point we have a projective
one point on the left we have the symbol Sigma
A to B on the right and by by definition this
combination evaluates to this projective one point
what is that it's a * x + B * y to B * x - A *
y all right so using projective matrices
with a bit of linear algebra the same
formula can be written in terms of
this product here x to Y multiplied
by this particular projective 2x2
matrix A B B minus a so the a b
here correspond to those and the B and
minus a here correspond to the second
one okay so as an example a very simple uh kind of
calculation let's look at a general Sigma A to B
acting on one zero here's our line one zero what
happens well we have to take 1 * a + 0 * B that's
a and then we have to take B * 1 - A * 0 which
is B so the effect is that this product is a to
B and what is its effect on 0: 1 if we multiply
0 to 1 * Sigma A to B same Sigma then we get
0 * a + 1 * B that's B to B * 0 minus a * 1 so
that's minus a so we're getting this line here
B to minus a which we've seen before a couple
of times this is actually perpendicular to A to
B it's the unique line that's perpendicular
uh to the one that we started with now note
this is exactly the same as the way the rotation
row sub A to B acts on these two lines when we
multiplied 1 Z by row A to B we got exactly
this thing here and when we multiplied uh
01 we also got exactly this so at the level of
acting on the two basis lines the rotation and
the reflection seem to be indistinguishable well
they are indistinguishable so to get some better
intuition for what this reflection sort of does
when we thinking about it as taking XY and sending
it to this let's have a look at this example here
which has a few of our familiar lines there's 3:
1 there is 1:2 and there is min -1 to 1 there's
a few other lines there too and let's look at
just the reflection Associated to this line -1 to
1 so Sigma -1 to1 we're going to see what does it
do to various points when we multiply by it Okay
so we've already seen that when we uh multiply
1 Z to it we get uh -1 1 and when we multiply 01
by the sigma we get 1 1 let's check that so it's
-1 * 0 + 1 * 1 which is 1 and then 1 * 0 - -1 *
1 which is 1 so the effect is to send this line
to 1: one so this green arrow here represents the
effect of this rotation when we're thinking of it
sort of interpretation a wise all right what about
some other examples suppose we take minus1 one
and apply the reflection so that's that line there
and we apply the reflection you can calculate that
you get 2 to zero which is the same as 1 to zero
because we're allowed to scale these proportions
as we like in other words this reflection sends
this line back to one Z it undoes what it did at
this first stage similarly if we apply it to 1 one
then it undoes what it did at this stage and we
get back to 01 so this reflection has the property
that it sends this line to this line and it sends
this line line to this line it really does look
like it's reflection about some intermediate line
that's sort of halfway between those two lines
whatever halfway means and similarly this line
is sent to this one this one is sent to this one
it looks like it's again reflection perhaps in a
line halfway between whatever that means let's
look at some other examples and I'll leave you
to check my computations that 1 two multiplied
by Sigma gives us 1 to three so one two is sent
to 13 it's just a small movement 3: 1 is sent
to min-1 2 there's 3: 1 it's sent to minus1 2
which is this one here oh you also go this way it
doesn't really matter which way we think about the
movement so in all cases it does really
look like we are reflecting but whether
we're reflecting in this line or a perpendicular
line it's a bit hard to say it looks like they're
both equivalent and the existence of these red
lines is not yet established so the red dotted
lines here appear to be the reflecting lines of
this reflection but it turns out that in fact
they don't exist okay so this is a reflection
which is not associated to an actual reflecting
line that's just the way it
is all right so please check these computations
and make a few computations of your own right
it's very easy you just draw some lines and you
apply the formula and you see what happens to
the various reflections of various lines to
get a good sense of what these Reflections do
okay so now we have some important exercises for
you to do okay so the first one is to show that
this reflection Sigma is indeed an isometry the
same property that the rotations that we talked
about in our last video had namely if we take
the quadrants Q between C * Sigma and D * Sigma
we get the same thing as the quadrants
between C and D for any two projective
one points C and D so we have two projective one
points C and D we measure the quadrants between
them that's certain number and then we apply a
reflection to both of them that the quadrants
between the New Image points is going to
be the same as the original ones and the
second exercise is to establish some identities
that relate Reflections and rotations and the
multiplications of two of them so this follows
very much this formula which we established in
our last video all right one rotation followed
by another rotation is another rotation whose
indices are obtained from the indices of these
ones in some pleasant fashion that was closely
connected with complex number multiplication
so I want you to extend this now to not just
understand what a rotation times a rotation is
but also what a reflection times a reflection
is and what a rotation times a reflection is
and what a reflection times the rotation is so
for example this is saying that if we rotate by
A to B and then we rotate by C to D the effect
of doing both of those is the same as a single
rotation about this new Point ac+ BD to a D minus
BC and if we combine a rotation sub A to
B with a reflection Sub C to D then we
get another reflection now whose indices
are obtained by AC plus BD and a D minus
BC and similarly if you do it the other way around
you do the reflection first and then the rotation
well then you also get another reflection but it's
a little bit different from the one that you got
in this case so the situation is not commutative
anymore okay so we get AC minus BD here and a D+
BC okay and I just want to recall that the meaning
of these compositions is the following if p is a
one point then Sigma 1 Sigma 2 that product acting
on P or multiplied by P is by definition this that
what you get when you multiply P by Sigma 1 first
and then multiply by Sigma 2 so basically moving
the brackets from here to here it's kind of an
associative uh law when combining these things
okay so these formulas were uh part of my paper
that I wrote some time ago called one-dimensional
metrical geometry so you can have a look at
that if you want some more detail uh appeared
in geometria deata in 2007 and that has more
information uh that will extend the story in other
directions as well and we'll talk a little bit
about some of the other directions that uh that
are going on there so we have this very pleasant
situation where our projective line supports both
rotations as well as Reflections rows and sigmas
and we've seen that these things are closed under
multiplication or composition when we combine
any two of them we get another object of the
same same kind either one of these or one of those
now there's some special aspects of this situation
which is uh very important so from a structural
point of view Associated to this word group
in mathematics all right so one of the aspects
is that there is a special isometry called the
identity the particular rotation row sub 1 to zero
has the property that when you take X to Y you
multiply by Row 1 to zero you get back X to Y it
acts as the identity it doesn't change the object
when you multiply by it's like multiplying by one
in the natural numbers so we might say that uh Row
1 to zero is e introduce this new term e for it
once we have this idea of an identity we can also
talk about the inverse of any of these isometries
so if we take row A to B and we multiply by row a
to minus B then you can check that what you get
is e please do that and you get the same thing
if you do it in the other direction too if you do
row a to minus B first and then A to B so we say
that these two are inverses in this group kind of
structure because when we multiply them together
we get one just like in ordinary multiplication
say two and a half are inverses because when we
multiply them together we get one similarly with
the sigmas but the situation there is a little bit
simpler because the inverse of a reflection is
just itself you do a reflection and then do it
again multiply those two together you can check
that what you're going to get is this identity
rotation and this is a kind of common symbol that
we introduced for this inverse idea so we write
row A to B to the minus one up here equals row a
to minus B to reflect the fact that these two are
inverses in this multiplication and the third kind
of important property is that this multiplication
is associative what does that mean well it means
that if we have any three isometries say to one
to 2 and to three and these tows could be either
rotations or Reflections then if we multiply to
1 * to 2 first and then by to 3 we get the same
thing as to 1 * to 2 * to 3 in that order so the
brackets where the brackets are doesn't matter and
I'll leave it to you as an exercise to prove these
statements very good exercise involving a bit of
work okay so now we want to formalize what's going
on here with this group structure so we're going
to introduce the idea of a group in the context of
this isometry situation for our simple projective
line all right so we're going to talk about the
group structure on the isometries so what we're
going to do is we're going to define a new type
of object which we'll write perhaps like this Isom
of P1 Q so the isometries of the projective line
together with this projective quadrants which is
an essential aspect of the geometry that we're
building we start with a projective line we impose
this particular notion of quadrants or projective
quadrants and then we see these various Notions
of Reflections and rotations and so on appear
okay and we call this the isometry group of the
ukian projective line okay and what actually is
it what does it consist of well the isometry group
consists of two types of objects objects of the
form row A to B where A to B is a projective one
point and sigma say C to D where C to D is another
projective one point so these are the two kinds
of objects that are going to be included in this
object so when we Define for example rational
numbers we talked about rat being this sort
of domain which consists of things of the form
A over B now we're considering a a new kind of
object which consists of not just one kind of
object but two different kinds of objects two
different kinds of symbols which are going
to be included in this group and note that
this is not a set when we're not supposing
that we have collected all the rotations and
all the reflections together in set because we
haven't these numbers here can be very very big
they can be fractions with huge numerators and
denominators perhaps you know far bigger than
we're able to actually put onto our computers
we're only really saying that we have a way of
identifying that yes this object that we see
in front of us is an object of this kind or
it's an object of this kind right that's
all what we really talking about a way of
identifying individual objects and saying
yep we're talking about something in this
object so it's rather a specification of a
type of object the objects themselves are
particular symbols these things are just symbols
subject to the multiplication rules of exercise
138.236.128.7 so those four rules are going
to be encoded in the multiplication structure
of this isometry group so we can now view this
object independent of its Origins as acting on
the projective line once we have this list
of multiplication rules for these rows and
sigmas we could remove all reference to the
original projective line except of course
that the indices here are projective lines but
we don't actually have to think of this as being
a rotation of the projective line anymore or
this as a reflection of the projective line
anymore we just think of them as symbols which
are defined by those four rules given in by this
exercise this is a kind of an abstract group we
could write down um an abstract multiplication
in principle at least if uh we had only a small
number of Reflections and rotations all right so
this notion of a group is a very important one
this is the first group really that we're that
we're meeting where we have a a multiplication
and we have an identity and we have inverses
and we have associativity those are really the
three crucial properties that Define this make
it a what's called a group okay so this is uh
quite interesting and it's so the basic building
blocks for understanding the basic isometries
of a one-dimensional projective situation in
our next video I want to show you that you can
extend these ideas to finite fields that we
can talk about geometries over finite field and
that these Reflections and these rotations make
perfect sense there and if we choose the finite
field in a small way we can actually encode and
completely specify the multiplication structure
that's going on here and we can see things very
explicitly gives us a quite a different handle
on investigating geometrical situations by having
our main interest reflected in sort of much
smaller more manageable objects which still
encode or reflect a lot of the main properties
of the original one that we're interested in
over the rational numbers so potentially very uh
powerful tool and I think you'll have fun seeing
some sort of combinatorial finite discreet
aspects to what's really fundamental ukan
geometry so I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening